When a Saudi Arabian music video recently went viral, depicting niqab-clad female singers throwing shapes and chanting lines such as “may men disappear”, the colourful skit was hailed as a challenge to stereotypes. Yet the spotlight barely shifted: the notion of the voiceless Arab female lingers in the mainstream, despite the fact that Saudi does not reflect the Arab world at large. In fact, strong-voiced women have been a lynchpin of Arabic music in its far-ranging forms – from folk songs to commercial pop – across many generations and nations.
“All of the Arabic women I grew up listening to or watching had a very strong character,” says Lebanese singer-songwriter Yasmine Hamdan. She began her music career fronting Beirut’s first electro-punk outfit, Soapkills, in the late ‘90s, and is about to release her second solo album, Al Jamilat (The Beautiful Ones). “It’s normal; Arab women have always been very active at the forefront of culture – as film producers since the 1920s; as singers, dancers, choreographers, writers for much longer than that.”
The most iconic figure in Arabic music remains the Egyptian singer-songwriter and actress Umm Kulthum, known as ‘the Star of the East’. Born into an imam’s family at the turn of the 20th Century, she was studying classical repertoire by her teens, and making her mark as an extraordinary vocal talent by the 1920s. She also starred in several films, including 1937's Nashid Al Amal (The Chant Of Hope), in which she played a divorced single mother working to provide for her daughter; its soundtrack included The University Song, with typical themes of determination, solidarity and national fervour. She presented womanhood at the forefront of national identity, alongside men, singing about politics as well as romantic epics. Umm Kulthum proved an astute businesswoman as well as an accomplished performer; her powerful repertoire and savvy collaborations covered patriotic sentiments as well as yearning serenades, and Hamdan argues that “the unity of the Arab world was embodied in Umm Kulthum’s voice”. By the time of her death in 1975, she had earned international acclaim. As musicologist Virginia Danielson writes in Harvard Magazine, “Imagine a singer with the virtuosity of Joan Sutherland or Ella Fitzgerald, the public persona of Eleanor Roosevelt and the audience of Elvis, and you have Umm Kulthum”. Many of the pioneering stars of Arabic music were connected with the emerging ‘golden age’ of Egyptian cinema, which brought their talent and glamour to mass audiences. Top-billed names included Leila Mourad, from a Jewish Cairene family, and Asmahan, who came from a background of Syrian Druze nobility, and whose mesmerising musical range was cut short with her death in 1944, aged just 31. The orchestral songs of this era are still Arab pop culture staples, regularly covered alongside current commercial hits on reality shows like Arab Idol; however, the spirit of the original female singers – mellifluous yet headstrong, poetic and political, open to varied styles – is arguably best embodied in a new generation of independent artists. Hamdan describes hearing Asmahan’s track Ya Habibi Ta’ala (My Beloved, Come) in a Beirut club at 4am as a musical “epiphany”; she recalls: “It felt extremely elegant, eloquent and emotional; sophisticated and edgy for its time.” On the electronic productions of her debut solo album, 2013’s Ya Nass (Hey People), Hamdan paid homage to the likes of Asmahan and Mourad, as well as legendary Egyptian singer/composer Mohammed Abdel Wahab, through covers and soulful original material.
Finding a voice
On her new album, Hamdan mostly focuses on her own songs, written from the perspective of female characters. “They have a lot of contradictions; I like to show my taste for imperfection,” she laughs. “These characters are both dominant and fragile, which is beautiful to me.” Choosing to sing in Arabic when her peers were gravitating to Western pop was, in its own way, a form of rebellion. She told the Guardian: “I felt that the Arabic language was a raw material that could be shaped, freely. This was something that was thrilling to me.”
Conflicting judgements of ‘respectability’ across the Arab world, about anything from dress codes to lyrics and mixed audiences, are another source of rebellion. “Well, there are lots of codes in Arabic music, and it’s not easy to break them,” replies Hamdan, who is now based in Paris with her husband (the Palestinian film director, Elia Suleiman), and continues to tour internationally. “But the conservatism is not only in religion; it can be social or intellectual, and there is a kind of taboo in touching ‘sacred’ older songs.” The Tunisian-born New York-based protest musician Emel Mathlouthi, whose second album Ensen (Human) has just been released, echoes this sentiment: “We have a lot of female Arab pop stars, so that’s not a problem, but I definitely think that it’s harder when you have your own project,” she says. “In the Arab world, there are high expectations of good singers, which I really like, but the mainstream also has a very traditional approach, and it’s hard to get away from the image of the ‘static diva’.”
When I sing in my first language, whether in dialect or classical Arabic, the singing has another dimension – Emel Mathlouthi
The so-called “voice of the Tunisian Revolution” is a dynamic and politically conscious performer; her work has regularly tackled inequality and her track Kelmti Horra (My Word Is Free) was embraced as an anthem of the Arab Spring, leading to her performance at the 2015 Nobel Peace Prize Concert. Mathlouthi cites influences including “the strong vocals and deep songs” of Lebanese superstar Fairuz (who, like her compatriot Sabah, has headlined worldwide venues including New York’s Carnegie Hall, London’s Royal Albert Hall, and the Paris Olympia), and the Egyptian protest singer and composer Sheikh Imam. She’s also a fan of US singer-songwriter Joni Mitchell – on this year’s International Women’s Day, Mathlouthi is taking part in a concert celebrating Mitchell’s album Hejira at London’s Southbank Centre.
Mathlouthi says she wanted her album Ensen “to reflect on the contrasts of Arab Muslim society; this album was a quest about how to connect with heritage, and how to distribute that with a personal touch.” She believes the choice of language itself can be a form of speaking out. “What I find hard right now is that when a woman sings in Arabic, unless it’s in an exotic context or party music, it blocks her from participating in the mainstream. Perhaps this is true of most non-English tongues, but when I sing in my first language, whether in dialect or fusha [classical Arabic], the singing has another dimension. As Arabs, it’s important that we associate our voices with art and positive expressions.”
Beyond the mainstream
By stepping out of the mainstream, many artists can gain more autonomy – and tap into the legacy of strong female Arab artists at the same time. Around the Middle East, diverse underground and DIY music scenes offer a counterpoint to glossy commercial Arab pop. Maryam Saleh, a singer-songwriter from Cairo, argues that both female and male players have to strive equally hard in this independent realm, where there is relatively little infrastructure for venues and labels: in fact, compared to male counterparts, she says, “you somehow harbour a sense of empowerment as an independent female artist here”. Of course, strong female voices aren’t always in synch; for Saleh, Umm Kulthum represents a music and business talent who aligned with authority: “Her voice, interpretation, choices and alliances summed up to turn her into an icon and institution. In the case of female alternative artists today, they are truly independent, as well as being the composers and producers of their own work; [Palestinian singer and musician] Kamilya Jubran is a great example.”
Saleh’s music, such as the track Toul El-Tarie (On All The Roads), is beautifully poetic and gritty, and her songs combine her own lyrics with past and present Arabic poetry, including her Egyptian contemporary Mido Zoheir. “I’m drawn to texts that unassumingly express sentiments we feel in everyday life… sort of like riddles, satirical, yet they strike very personal chords,” she says.
Sarah El-Miniawy, who founded the ground-breaking international music management and PR agency Simsara, argues that “alternative Arabic music, or any non-English speaking music for that matter, is hardly featured in mainstream media; when it is, the framing is within the politics of the region, and that’s the same for both genders.
“There is no denying that the environment is tougher on Arab independent artists, and so naturally you become more resourceful with the little you have. If we go as far as saying that being oppressed inspires you and makes you more determined, then it verges on romanticising a dire reality. Independent musicians in the Arab world pursue their vocation just like any other musician elsewhere, and they adapt to the lifestyle it brings to them.”
Both El-Miniawy and Saleh point out that, in the digital age, these varied forms in music and arts develop more swiftly than ever. And it is in this limitless space that more points of connection are made across the Arab world, between genres and generations, with strong female voices shifting shape, confronting reality and summoning fantasy, and continuing to resonate.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called “If You Only Read 6 Things This Week”. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Earth, Culture, Capital, Travel and Autos, delivered to your inbox every Friday. 
Is it ever too late to learn a musical instrument? According to the leading British concert pianist James Rhodes, the answer is an emphatic ‘no’ - and he has just written the book to prove it. The delightfully straight-talking How To Play the Piano is an elegant little volume that promises - with just 45 minutes’ practice a day, six days a week, for six weeks - to enable anyone with access to a keyboard to play one of JS Bach’s most beloved works, the Prelude no 1 in C major from Book One of The Well-Tempered Clavier.
The book, Rhodes reveals, came from an overwhelming response to his excoriating 2015 memoir Instrumental, which addressed his devastating mental breakdown and the critical role music played in his recovery and redemption. Following its publication, countless readers were moved to tell him they’d been inspired by his words to return to the piano themselves. “I lose track of how many people have said ‘Oh, I used to play when I was a kid, I wish I’d stuck it out,’” he tells me, mentioning one particular email that sparked the idea.
James Rhodes 
Concert pianist James Rhodes believes it’s never too late to take up a musical instrument (Credit: GL Portrait / Alamy)
“I got a message from a retired Mexican professional airline pilot who said: ‘I used to play as a kid but I haven’t played for 50 years. I read Instrumental, I bought a piano, I got myself a piano teacher, now I practise every day. And I just want you to know: these are my best days.’ I found that so moving.”
Learning a musical instrument can unlock the door to a new dimension that many of us have forgotten exists – James Rhodes
Rhodes’ new book is the first in publisher Quercus Books’ Little Book of Life Skills series. It manages to tap into something pervasive, even romantic in the Western zeitgeist - becoming better, more skilled, more cultured and accomplished versions of ourselves - whilst never deviating from the integrity of a tradition that has remained essentially unchanged since humans first started making music on keyboards hundreds of years ago. “Learning a musical instrument can unlock the door to a new dimension that many of us have forgotten even exists,” Rhodes begins in his opening chapter, and there is no denying the immense appeal of laying aside technology to engage one’s fingers and brain and soul in a pursuit that has nothing to do with email, texting, or social media.
His project offers perhaps the ultimate digital detox. Reading the book, I had fantasies of lighting a few candles of an evening, pouring a large glass of wine and getting stuck in to my piano practice: an alluring act of hygge, artistic self-improvement and self-care all in one. If you’d told me as a kid that I’d one day actually look forward to practising the piano, I would have laughed in disbelief. But in Rhodes’ witty, engaging, unpretentious hands, the prospect of daily piano-practice and its requirement of deep concentration becomes both meditation and medication.
Candlelit piano 
The deep concentration required by piano practice offers perhaps the ultimate digital detox (Credit: Davide Ferreri / Alamy)
“We live in an age of such instant gratification, we’re always looking outside of ourselves, and I think we’ve lost sight of just doing something quiet for ourselves,” he offers, when I suggest that the book is also a timely reflection of a modern Western aspiration not to material wealth but to spiritual and emotional enrichment, as seen in the proliferation of on- and offline adult skills courses such as those offered by Skillshare, Creative Live and The School of Life.
“Not for the reward but just for the sheer loveliness of doing it. I think of playing the piano as a version of mindfulness - for which you don’t need a fleet of commando-style, shaven-haired monks, you just need a keyboard.” Besides, have we ever needed analogue escape routes more than now? Rhodes agrees. “All the news is bad, so why not just do something lovely for ourselves?”
Ditch the scales
Besides, learning - or re-learning - a skill such as playing the piano is proven to be good for our brains. According to research from the University of Texas, “mentally-challenging leisure activities” can re-wire our grey matter, restoring our brains to a more “youth-like” state. Rhodes is careful not to over-promise. “Look, this book won’t have you playing Rachmaninov or Chopin etudes. I was well aware that if you set out with a book about learning to play the piano and you say it takes 10,000 hours, nobody’s going to do it, because for whatever reason, good or bad, it has become hard to find time to simply focus and work on something for yourself. Time is such a precious commodity. But it will have you playing some Bach. And the Bach is still challenging, it will still push you, but it’s as accessible as possible.” He continues. “And six weeks is an outsize estimate: if you have time to practise more, or you played a lot as a kid, it will come back quicker. And it will give you a proper insight into the music. Maybe that in itself will be enough, or maybe you’ll enjoy it so much you’ll decide to get a teacher and learn other things.”
Prelude 
Bach’s Prelude no 1 in C major is challenging but as accessible as possible (Credit: Mary Evans Picture Library / Alamy)
Find a piece you love, and work on it through the music - James Rhodes
Central to his approach is the beauty of the actual music itself. “I’m a big fan of taking a piece that you want to play and finding a positive way to work at it, not through scales and etudes and exercises, but by simply playing it,” he explains. The book breaks down exactly how to practise in this way, including his genius fingerings, which staves off the potential boredom and frustration that would lead many of us to give up. I tell him I could never face doing scales and arpeggios as a child and I feel no differently about them as an adult.
Bach piano 
Rhodes encourages learners to ditch the scales and work through a piece of music that they love (Credit: Jeff Morgan / Alamy)
“Arpeggios and scales are never necessary!” he insists. “In any piece there will be technical challenges that you can work on using the music itself. I also loathe doing scales and arpeggios, but hey, I’m looking at this Mozart concerto that’s sitting on my piano right now, and it’s filled with scales and arpeggios. If you’re working on a piece and achieving something, it’s a great way to learn. Find a piece you love, and work on it through the music.”
Rhodes is evangelical about the joys of connecting or reconnecting with the piano, and beyond the book itself, his website has tutorials and videos dedicated to help you on your journey. The start of a new year, with all its attendant resolve, seems as good a time as any to take the plunge; our lives, after all, are not getting any longer. “Yeah. We’re not going to be lying on our death bed thinking, I wish I’d sent a few more emails and done a few more spreadsheets,” he jokes. “But you might well think: I wish I’d written that novel or painted that picture. Or learned to play that piece of Bach on the piano…”
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called “If You Only Read 6 Things This Week”. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Earth, Culture, Capital, Travel and Autos, delivered to your inbox every Friday.
The Vernadsky scientific base – a handful of grey huts surrounded by penguins in Antarctica – was once home to some of the world’s most important climate science. It was here, in 1985, that British scientists did some of the key work to discover the hole in the ozone layer. But today, it’s home to something altogether different: the closest thing Antarctica has to a rock star, a 44-year-old long-haired Ukrainian geophysicist called Bogdan Gavrylyuk.
Bogdan 
Geophysicist Bogdan Gavrylyuk is the closest thing Antarctica has to a rock star (Credit: Alex Marshall)
“Here it’s a special place for writing songs,” he says, standing in his laboratory, where musical instruments are propped up among the scientific equipment. “We’re like prisoners, locked up for 10 months in the cold. Alone! But it creates a special mood. Possibilities!
Nothing can prepare you for the strangeness of Antarctica
“I write all kinds of songs: about pirates and gangsters; about sailors hard at work; about the salty, sweet taste of kisses; about hope and love. I can’t write about those things back in Ukraine – there’s too much noise.”
Penguins 
You only hear sounds in snatches – when you stumble into the middle of a penguin colony, or the ice cracks and sends part of a glacier plunging into the ocean (Credit: Getty)
When you visit Antarctica, music isn’t the first thing that comes to mind. One of the most striking things about it is its very lack of sound. There are no revving cars, or people barking into mobile phones. There aren’t even trees for the wind to rustle. You only hear sounds in snatches – when you stumble into the middle of a penguin colony, or the ice cracks and sends part of a glacier plunging into the ocean. That silence may seem obvious: Antarctica is the world’s last wilderness, a continent of over 5.4 million sq miles (14 million sq km), almost all of it under ice. But nothing can prepare you for the strangeness of it.
Great Scott
Music is, however, a surprising constant in Antarctica’s history. It’s been crucial to every exploration that came here, providing the most vivid link home, and it’s just as crucial today for the few thousand scientists who work hear in the continent’s summer (in winter, the population drops to around 1,000).
Gramophone 
Captain Scott took two gramophones to the continent for his final, tragic expedition (Credit: Getty)
You only have to read the accounts of the original polar expeditions to realise that. Captain Robert Falcon Scott, for instance, took two gramophones to the continent for his final, tragic expedition, when he reached the South Pole, but never made it back to camp. “It was usual to start the gramophone after dinner,” writes Apsley Cherry-Garrard, one of Scott’s party, in his memoir of the trip, The Worst Journey in The World. “It is necessary to be cut off from civilisation and all that it means to enable you to realise fully the power music has to recall the past, or the depth of meaning in it to soothe the present and give hope to the future.”
Scott 
Music provided comfort to Scott right up until his death (Credit: Getty)
Music provided comfort to Scott right up until his death. “We are in a desperate state, feet frozen, etc. No fuel and a long way from food,” he wrote to a friend on one of his final days. “But it would do your heart good to be in our tent, to hear our songs.”
There are many reports of sailors singing to penguins
It is not only at moments of desperation that music appears in such expedition records. There are many reports of sailors singing to penguins, for instance. The chicks especially would waddle curiously towards the sound, although God Save the King apparently sent them “headlong into the water.”
‘Being Maria’
Today, scientists rarely sing to the wildlife. But music still plays just as important a role in people’s lives. At the Vernadsky base, Bogdan gives impromptu concerts on Saturday nights, mainly on guitar, but sometimes using a piano he made in his lab (probably the only instrument built on the continent). He used to be in a rock band before becoming a polar scientist. “But our bassist was sent to prison and I came here. Antarctica’s not a good place to find band mates.”
Ukraine base 
At the Vernadsky base, Bogdan gives impromptu concerts playing the guitar or a piano he has made in his lab (Credit: Alex Martin)
Antarctica’s musical life changes depending on which base you visit. At Argentina’s Almirante Brown station, beneath a mountain in the aptly-named Paradise Bay, they only listen to metal. “One time each week, we get to clean and cook,” says Nano Donna, a 25-year-old researcher who has been measuring the salinity of water to ascertain how quickly glaciers are melting. “We call it ‘Being Maria’ or ‘Being Pedro’ and when it’s your turn, you get to pick the music. It’s the only time you get to make yourself really feel at home.” Nano has few other links back to his family when on the continent as he’s only allowed a five-minute phone call every fortnight.
Almirante 
At Argentina’s Almirante Brown station they only listen to metal (Credit: Getty)
The only other music that gets a look in, he adds, is Argentina’s national anthem. The scientists sang it when they arrived and they sang it a few days before I visited. “We thought we were leaving earlier than expected,” he says. “So we all got sad and went up to the top of the mountain, got a bit drunk and sung it as loud as we could. Then we slid down.
Nano Donna 
Nano Donna is a 25-year-old researcher who has been measuring the salinity of water to find out how quickly glaciers are melting (Credit: Alex Marshall)
“Do you know our anthem?” he asks. “It’s very loud and quick, like metal.”
If there’s one scientist who is moved by music as much as the original explorers, it’s a bearded, trucker cap-wearing American called Logan Pallin. He works at the US’s Palmer Station, a luxury hotel compared to the other bases, complete with streaming internet and a hot tub.
Palmer station 
The US’s Palmer Station is luxurious compared to the other bases, complete with internet and a hot tub (Credit: Alex Marshall)
Logan became obsessed with classical music as a boy thanks to his grandmother’s record collection, and soon took up the oboe (“It seemed a bit more masculine than the flute,” he says). He then sang tenor and even tried to teach himself several string instruments. He became so obsessed by classical music, in fact, he left university to move to Italy and try and make it as a composer. “I lived in a villa on a vineyard, drank a lot of wine and wrote a lot of music,” he says. “That was great time, until my parents were essentially like, ‘You’ve got to figure yourself out, otherwise we’ll cut you off’ – you can’t make much money yourself busking oboe in a street – so I went back to university and signed up on a trip to study pilot whales off the coast of North Carolina.”
Logan 
Logan Pallin is a classical-music obsessed American who works in Antarctica as a marine biologist (Credit: Alex Marshall)
Logan is now a marine biologist, which means he goes out in a boat every day looking for whales and monitoring their behaviour. “There’s nothing better,” he insists, his eyes widening to prove it. “It’s been a slow year. We’ve only seen 18, but a few days ago, we were out and it was a beautiful day and we sort of dozed off onboard, and we suddenly woke to the sound of a whale breathing five feet from us.
“We looked out and it just came up and spy-hopped – lifted its head out and looked right at us. Then it swam under us and around us, and dragged its fluke across the bottom of our boat. I didn’t take any photos. Moments like that you don’t want to.”
Logan deals with the endless waits for whales by putting on headphones and blasting opera – Pavarotti in the Barber of Seville is a favourite. He’s even rigged up a car battery to his iPhone so it never runs out of charge. “Can you imagine listening to something like Pavarotti out here in this landscape?” he says, waving a hand out towards some ice bergs, each of which has seals lazing on them. “It’s the most amazing, exhilarating feeling. I’m very lucky.”
As the first songwriter awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, Bob Dylan’s win has surprised many. In response, the permanent secretary of the Swedish Academy, Sara Danius (who professes herself a Bowie fan), says Dylan is “a great poet in the English-speaking tradition”. She argues: “If you look far back... you discover Homer and Sappho. They wrote poetic texts that were meant to be listened to, performed, often together with instruments, and it’s the same way for Bob Dylan. We still read Homer and Sappho, and we enjoy it. Same thing with Bob Dylan – he can be read and should be read.” 
Now that the remit has widened, which other songwriters deserve the honour? Here are some suggestions.
Smokey Robinson
Smokey Robinson (Credit: Alamy)
(Credit: Alamy)
Whether or not Dylan really called Smokey Robinson “America’s greatest living poet”, his exquisite songwriting has become a benchmark of the classic soul canon and beyond. Aside from his own sweetly-sung Motown hits with The Miracles (The Tracks Of My Tears; I Second That Emotion), Robinson penned finely-tuned killer tracks for the likes of The Temptations (My Girl; Get Ready), The Marvelettes (The Hunter Gets Captured By The Game), Marvin Gaye (Ain’t That Peculiar), and many more. And Paul McCartney definitely did say: “Smokey Robinson was like God in our eyes”.
Morrissey
Morrissey (Credit: Alamy)
(Credit: Alamy)
The bleakly beautiful paeans and acid ripostes of this Manchester indie anti-hero have seized the hearts of generations, from The Smiths’ classics including There Is A Light That Never Goes Out and This Charming Man to Morrissey’s solo hits such as Everyday Is Like Sunday (1988). Admittedly, Moz is more likely to win the Nobel Prize in Literature for his song lyrics than his fiction effort, the widely-panned 2015 novella List Of The Lost.
Chuck D
Chuck D (Credit: Alamy)
(Credit: Alamy)
There is no mistaking the incendiary and eloquent delivery of Public Enemy’s frontman – or the fact that hip hop anthems such as Don’t Believe The Hype and Fight The Power delivered a genuine shock to the mainstream system. On the clamorous and funky Revolutionary Generation (from 1990 album Fear Of A Black Planet), Chuck also pays due respect to black female power: “Day to day, America eats its young/ And defeats our women/ There is a gap so wide we can swim in”.
Kate Bush
Kate Bush (Credit: Alamy)
(Credit: Alamy)
Ever since Kate Bush’s youthful breakthrough with Wuthering Heights in 1978, her lyrics have had a consciously literary character. Whether she is channelling Emily Brontë or James Joyce, or spinning purely from her own imagination, from 1985’s Cloudbusting to 2005’s King Of The Mountain, Bush is an extraordinary, vivid storyteller.
Caetano Veloso
Caetano Veloso (Credit: Alamy)
(Credit: Alamy)
He is a Brazilian Tropicália icon, collaborative spirit and prolific writer, whose songs have captured a provocative, political spirit since the late 1960s. Early works such as É Proibido Proibir (It Is Forbidden To Forbid) have triggered riotous audience reactions; later successes have won him Grammys and other global accolades.
Gulzar
Gulzar (Credit: Getty Images)
(Credit: Getty Images)
Like Dylan, the award-festooned, multi-lingual Indian poet and lyricst Sampooran Singh Kalra, also known as Gulzar, has previously won an Oscar for his songwriting (for Jai Ho, his collaboration with AR Rahman on 2007’s Slumdog Millionaire soundtrack). Gulzar’s Bollywood smash hits have been praised for their spiritual complexity; for one of his best-known works, Chaiya Chaiya (another Rahman collaboration, from 1998 film Dil Se), he took inspiration from a 17th-Century Sufi folk poem.
Patti Smith
Patti Smith (Credit: Alamy)
(Credit: Alamy)
Punk poetess, Mapplethorpe muse, and art rocker Patti Smith’s expressions have ranged from righteous rage to fantastically tender declarations of love. Her most quoted lyrics are arguably the opening lines to her 1975 debut album Horses (“Jesus died for someone’s sins, but not mine”), but Smith’s world is incredibly vast, and her work has involved increasingly global influences over the years.
Joni Mitchell
Joni Mitchell (Credit: Getty Images)
(Credit: Getty Images)
Joni Mitchell has never been a predictable songwriter, from her coffeehouse folk origins in Canada, to LA’s febrile Laurel Canyon scene of the late 1960’s and early ‘70s – before the stark revelations of her legendary 1971 album, Blue. From jaunty choruses to haunting confessions, and ever since, Mitchell’s songs have proved both delicate and undeniably powerful.
Nick Cave
Nick Cave (Credit: Alamy)
(Credit: Alamy)
As solo artist, collaborator, or most famously, as frontman of The Bad Seeds for over 30 years, Australian rocker Nick Cave has always combined hard and dirty riffs with brutally smart and often gut-wrenchingly funny lyricism. That power is there throughout tracks such as Red Right Hand (1994), and it sounds undeniably devastating after the artist’s own personal tragedy, on his latest album with the band, Skeleton Tree.
Kanye West
Kanye West (Credit: Alamy)
(Credit: Alamy)
Having proclaimed himself “Yeezus” back in 2013, Kanye might well see the Nobel Prize as a sure thing (second) coming – and it would certainly add celeb swagger to the ceremony. Despite the bluster, Kanye has dropped some bombshell social commentary: take 2010 track Gorgeous: “Inter century anthems based off inner city tantrums/ Face it, Jerome get more time than Brandon/ And at the airport they check all through my bag and tell me that it’s random”.
Leonard Cohen
Leonard Cohen (Credit: Alamy)
(Credit: Alamy)
There’s an unmistakeably grizzled soul and a satirical edge to Cohen’s celebrated songs, such as Hallelujah and First We Take Manhattan. His lyrics have an intensity that arguably relates to his novel writing; more than ever, they also seem to present us with a picture of our own mortality. Now 82, Cohen has just announced that his next album is on the way.
Stephen Sondheim 
Stephen Sondheim (Credit: Alamy)
(Credit: Alamy)
On and off-Broadway, Sondheim has arguably elevated the showtune to a work of high art. The composer/lyricist’s best-known and widely covered musical numbers, such as Send In The Clowns (from 1973’s A Little Night Music) and Losing My Mind (from 1971’s Follies) are dreamily romantic in tone, with a much darker heart at play.
personalised soundtracks as the age of ‘the talkies’ dawned.
The sound of fear can’t be constrained by a single genre or instrument, but at its best, this music is as gripping as the scariest visual, and it is timelessly evocative. Take Bernard Herrmann’s Hitchcock soundtracks, especially his sleek, highly-strung score for Psycho (1960); its ‘stingers’ (those slashing violins, designed to shred your nerves each time you hear them) defined a device that has been echoed in countless other films. 
Shower scene from Psycho 
Alfred Hitchcock had originally intended the shower scene in Psycho to run without music (Credit: Getty Images)
The 1970s and ‘80s, and the rise of the synthesiser, brought fresh blood to the scene; this phase has also fuelled a recent resurgent passion for horror music. Modern hits such as the Netflix series Stranger Thingspay homage to the era right through to their pulsing electronic sounds. The alluringly eerie original score for the show, created by Michael Stein and Kyle Dixon (of Austin outfit SURVIVE), also evokes pioneers like director/composer John Carpenter (who soundtracked many of his own films including 1978’s Halloween, and 1987’s Prince of Darkness, as well as enlisting composer Ennio Morricone for 1982’s The Thing). Nowadays, vinyl reissues of classic horror soundtracks sell out on labels such as Death Waltz Recording Co, and the original artists are packing out international tours; both Carpenter and Italian horror music maestro Fabio Frizzi have performed London concerts over the Halloween weekend.
Moog swings
“There is a kind of magic happening. In the last decade, this love for horror music has experienced a rebirth – maybe it makes reality sound better!” the jovial Frizzi tells BBC Culture. Frizzi’s prolific catalogue is especially noted for his gore-drenched collaborations with director Lucio Fulci, including Zombie Flesh Eaters (1979) and The Beyond (1981).
“Music has always helped horror movies to establish a mood, build tension and atmosphere – but the demand for these soundtracks has been mind-boggling,” says Death Waltz label manager Spencer Hickman. “There’s a bunch of people that remember these films from their youth, as well as young people looking back to a ‘golden age’ of soundtracks.”
John Carpenter (Credit: Credit: Getty Images)
John Carpenter is currently performing his Release the Bats tour in the UK, France and Germany (Credit: Getty Images)
“A lot of these films had smaller budgets,” he says. “Musicians took chances more, and improvised more. The scores still stand out as really strong pieces of work and musicianship.”
Hickman makes a point of championing new music alongside vintage scores; his label will release Pierre Takal’s ultra-tense synth score for Morgan Spurlock’s new documentary, Rats. This hardened horror fan has no doubt about his most fearful favourite soundtrack, however: it’s Italian outfit Goblin’s haunted lullaby for Dario Argento’s Suspiria (1977): “Suspiria has all these weird old instruments and chanting; if you listen to it in the dark, you’re definitely not going to sleep.”
John Carpenter has also credited Suspiria as an influence on his unforgettable Halloweenscore – though his motif for a stalking Michael Myers also goes back further: “My father taught me how to play the bongos. He taught me 5/4 time when I was about 13 years old,” Carpenter told Rolling Stone. “All I did was sit down at a piano and play octaves and went up half a step. That’s the Halloween theme,” he explained. “I have minimal chops as a musician.”
Still from Suspiria 
Italian prog-rock band Goblin contributed the soundtrack to many of Dario Argento’s films, including Suspiria from 1977 (Credit: Alamy)
Even as Carpenter’s film budgets increased, he maintained a minimal approach to musical shocks. “You’re trying to create suspense, this sense of ‘What’s coming?’. Think of the Jaws theme. It’s two notes. It keeps you in suspense.” 
Science of fear
There is an art to a killer horror soundtrack – and arguably, a science, too. An academic study led by Professor Daniel Blumstein at the University of California investigated “non-linear” sounds in movies, and reported that horror soundtracks tapped into our primal fears.
 “The music in horror movies reminds us subconsciously of primordial times,” says Rowan Hooper, managing editor of New Scientist. “Non-linear sounds like Psycho’s violin ‘stingers’ mimic the sound of animals in distress; they trigger our fear of being chased by dangerous predators. Things that feel harsh and unfamiliar manipulate us emotionally.”
Stranger Things 
Netflix’s Stranger Things has revived the stylings of ‘80s horror movies, including a synth-heavy soundtrack (Credit: Netflix)
“Everybody has the same basic fear response, regardless of culture; the interesting thing is how you can trigger it in different audiences. Both the Halloween and Stranger Things themes have a really strong heartbeat sound in them,” Hooper points out. “That clearly taps into adrenalin building, and our fight or flight instinct. In Stranger Things, there is also an almost sensual melody; it smuggles in the fear under this beautiful wrapping.”
The sound of fear always plays with shocking contrasts; it pulls you in, and pushes you away – Mica Levi’s monstrously seductive score for Jonathan Glazer’s Under the Skin (2013) is another modern classic. Finely-timed silence speaks volumes, too. “That’s when your brain fills in the gaps – building up to the scare moment,” says Hooper.
Under the Skin 
One of the most unsettling scores of recent times has come from the British composer Mica Levi for Jonathan Glazer’s Under the Skin (Credit: Alamy)
Frizzi explains further: “If you keep up a hard sound from beginning to end, you don’t surprise anybody. You have to create something attractive; your experience of fear could actually be a sweet moment. You’re also trying to create a melody that summons the entire film in a few notes.
“Each time you score a horror movie, you must become an actor involved in the story. I come from an old school symphonic background, and I always had good musicians; it was normal for us to experiment and find new sounds.” Although, Frizzi admits: “The very first time you face a scene with an eye being gouged out, it’s not so easy.”
At these extreme points, there is always space for a catchy surprise. Frizzi mentions that his music for Olga Karlatos’s grisly demise in Zombie Flesh Eaterswas actually inspired by the crescendo at the end of The Beatles’ track A Day in the Life. And the original pioneers’ appetites haven’t waned: Frizzi professes a mutual respect for contemporary horror composers such as Joseph Bishara (who uses experimental instruments to score films including The Conjuring and Insidious) and Marco Beltrami (who soundtracked Wes Craven’s Scream movies, as well as Halloween H20).
“Working on comedy movies is enjoyable, giallothrillers have blood and tension.
The best Beatles album? The rock historians often point to Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band as the moment, in 1967, when rock magically grew up and became a legitimate art form, at least as it was perceived by the mainstream media. Many fans love the sprawl and variety of the self-titled 1968 double album, popularly known as The White Album. In some quarters there’s a fondness for Abbey Road and its side-long suite of mini-songs, and lovers of the Bob Dylan-influenced folk-rock of the mid-‘60s cherish Rubber Soul above all. They all have merit, but none of them is as consistently brilliant and innovative as Revolver.
It does everything Sgt Pepper did, except it did it first and often better. It just wasn’t as well-packaged and marketed. The hype that preceded Sgt Pepper had a lot to do with the leaps in imagination, the studio-as-instrument adventurousness, that flourished on Revolver in half the time: the sessions for the 1966 album spanned two-and-a-half months whereas Sgt Pepper took an unprecedented five months to record.
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
Where Revolver began tells us a lot about where it ended up. When recording commenced in April 1966, The Beatles dived into the future with Tomorrow Never Knows. John Lennon conjured a sound in his head, and left it up to producer George Martin and a 20-year-old rookie engineer, Geoff Emerick, to figure out how to get it on tape. They succeeded spectacularly.
Revolver does everything Sgt Pepper did, except it did it first and often better
“He wanted his voice to sound like the Dalai Lama chanting from a hilltop," Martin later recalled. "Well, I said, 'It's a bit expensive going to Tibet. Can we make do with it here?'"
Lennon’s voice was filtered through a Leslie speaker cabinet, which gave it a vibrato effect normally associated with a Hammond keyboard. George Harrison brought Eastern drones to the track by playing a long-necked lute called the tamboura as well as a sitar, and Paul McCartney cooked up backward and vari-speed tape loops, including one that evoked the sound of seagulls. Ringo Starr’s drums were pushed to the foreground in the mix, inverting the typical hierarchy of most rock instrumentation. Ringo’s drums became the lead instrument, a thundering focal point amid the sonic chaos. Lennon’s ‘Tibetan-monk’ vocals urged listeners to "turn off your mind, relax and float downstream.”
‘One peak to the next’
All The Beatles’ previous albums had been rush jobs – their debut was recorded in four hours. But in 1966, the quartet pulled off the road for good to devote themselves to songwriting and record-making. Lennon and McCartney were still closely collaborating and pushing each other to new levels of innovation, and Harrison was emerging as a formidable third songwriter and voice in the band. Now, with the luxury of time to tinker, edit, re-edit and experiment, The Beatles were poised to record a masterpiece. 
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
Tomorrow Never Knows set a high standard for an album that moves from one peak to the next: Harrison’s corrosive guitar lick and McCartney’s commanding counterpoint bassline in Taxman made for one of The Beatles’ toughest-sounding tracks, the brisk strings on Eleanor Rigby presaged the chamber-pop feel and emotional tenor of She’s Leaving Home on Sgt Pepper, and Harrison’s plunge into Eastern mysticism and modalities on Love You To set the stage for the similarly inclined Within You Without You on the later album.
The melancholy beauty of Here, There and Everywhere answered the challenge of Brian Wilson’s Beach Boys masterpiece Pet Sounds, Doctor Robert and And Your Bird Can Sing achieved jingle-jangle guitar-pop perfection, and the horn-fueled Got to Get You Into My Life channeled Motown and Stax soul. Even a relatively lightweight track such as Yellow Submarine presaged the sometimes fanciful, almost child-like wonder of Sgt Pepper tracks such as Lovely Rita.
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
Sgt Pepper proved to be a prettier package, with its elaborate Peter Blake cover art of the satin-suited, newly bearded Beatles among images of cultural icons ranging from Karl Marx to Mae West. The Beatles spent 700 hours in the studio crafting it, but despite its unassailable high points – the staggering A Day in the Life, the acid-rock fantasia Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds – it’s also riddled with the cute and lightweight (When I’m 64, Lovely Rita) and the drab (Within You Without You).
Revolver was preceded by Rubber Soul, recorded in 1965, in which the band had achieved a new level of sophistication in its songwriting. The evocative wordplay in Norwegian Wood and In My Life aspired to the pop poetry of Dylan and Smokey Robinson. Song for song, it matches up well with Revolver, but it’s not nearly as sonically ambitious.
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
By the time of the 1968 White album, The Beatles were splintering and essentially turned the sessions into a series of solo recordings with the rest of the band members acting as session musicians.  It contains some brilliant music – including Lennon’s caustic Happiness is a Warm Gun and McCartney’s civil-rights hymn Blackbird – and at least a side’s worth of filler (sonic collage Revolution 9; juvenile Why Don’t We Do it in the Road?; blues parody Yer Blues; and the music hall pastiche of Honey Pie).
Abbey Road marks The Beatles’ final recording session, and it planted the seeds for progressive rock by stitching together 11 half-finished songs into a sublimely sequenced suite. Its closing line – “And in the end, the love you take is equal to the love you make" – is a career capstone worthy of The Beatles’ legacy. The first side of the album contains Harrison’s finest Beatles moment, Something, and Lennon’s metal precursor She’s So Heavy. It’s the album in The Beatles discography that comes closest to the majesty of Revolver.
Revolver wasn't always so highly regarded. A few months after it was released, The Beatles began recording Sgt Pepper, an event that was chronicled with great fanfare as the band sequestered themselves in Abbey Road studios. Its magnificence seemed a fait accompli. In contrast, the release of Revolver was overshadowed by Lennon’s infamous and widely misinterpreted ‘more popular than Jesus’ comments. But time has affirmed the enduring worth of Revolver. It now stands as The Beatles’ greatest album.
The next two months, during the Rio 2016 Olympics and Paralympics, should be heaven for music fans. Not because the Games are in Brazil, home of so much great music, from Bossa Nova to Tropicalia, but because it’s a chance to hear the most important songs ever written: national anthems. A whopping 208 of them to be exact. Or 209 if you include the Olympics’ very own, a somewhat wordy song calling on God to “shine in the momentum of noble contests”.
National anthems, despite only being a minute long, have genuinely achieved more than any other type of music you can name. People have fought wars singing them, and chanted them at protests. They’ve helped heal countries following bitter struggles, like South Africa’s after apartheid, although they’ve also been used to stoke ethnic divides.
Some have the most boring music imaginable, but others are like pop songs – unforgettable as soon as you’ve heard them. They have inspired everyone from sportspeople to schoolchildren, everywhere from Luanda to Liverpool.
So, which ones should you be praying get an airing at the Games? I would start with the following 10.
Russia, National Anthem
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
If there’s one anthem likely to cause controversy at the Games, it’s Russia’s. Given the revelations of state-sponsored doping of the country’s athletes, there’s a fair chance the crowd will boo it if any Russian wins gold. But that’d be a huge shame, and not only for the athletes. Russia’s anthem is one of the best there is; a song as powerful as an army marching across the steppe.
Myanmar, Until the End of the World
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
South Africans often claim to have the only anthem that starts in one tune and ends in another, their anthem being a blend of Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika, the great anti-apartheid song, and Die Stem van Suid-Afrika, the country’s anthem during apartheid. But that claim’s not exactly true. Myanmar’s anthem pulls off the same trick and in far stranger fashion. When played in the country, it starts with a traditional Burmese folk tune, until 30 seconds in when it suddenly lurches into a military march. It’s a bit like listening to a DJ who suddenly gets bored and switches records, but it’s all the better for it.
Nepal, We Are Hundreds of Flowers
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
Nepal’s isn’t your usual anthem. It doesn’t try to sound like a military march or a church hymn. Instead it sounds like a joyous Nepali pop song, the sort of music you hear blaring out of taxis in Kathmandu. It’s the only anthem normally played on a Casio keyboard, and it is so happy it’s somewhat unsettling to learn it was the product of a Maoist revolution.
Israel, The Hope
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
If there’s one emotion that anthems normally steer clear of, it’s sadness. Most composers seem to think that anthems must sound boisterous and proud if they are to stir patriotism. Israel’s proves that’s wrong. It was written before the country existed and is filled with longing for a Jewish homeland, both in its words and its nostalgic music. It’s so sad, in fact, it seems more appropriate for a funeral than celebrating a gold medal. But if any anthem is going to make an athlete cry on the podium, it’s this, and isn’t that what TV viewers want?
Kazakhstan, My Kazakhstan
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
Everybody enjoys it when the wrong anthem’s played by mistake, don’t they? Well, perhaps not Kazakh athletes. Back in 2012, one was played a song from the comedy Borat instead of their anthem. Another time, Kazakh athletes were played Ricky Martin’s Livin’ la Vida Loca at an opening ceremony. So if a Kazakh does wins gold, makes sure you’re listening. It should actually sound like this song.
Brazil, National Anthem
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
Brazil’s anthem is a genuine triumph, a mini-opera whose introduction alone spirals ever-upwards, getting quicker and quicker, as if the melody itself is trying to drag people onto their feet. But at this Olympics, you want it played for one reason only: because the crowd will sing. Brazilians don’t sing their anthem reluctantly, like most sports fans. They sing it joyously, belting out every word and carrying on singing long after the music’s stopped. If it’s played, it will be the most exhilarating sound at the Rio Games.
China, March of the Volunteers
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
China’s perky anthem is played so often at the Olympics, it’s surprising that few people know its unusual past. It was originally written for a 1935 film called Children of Troubled Times – a love story set against the Japanese invasion of Manchuria. But the song itself, especially its call to “build a new Great Wall with our own flesh and blood”, proved so popular it was not only released on vinyl, but it then practically forced its way into becoming the country’s anthem. By 1939, it was so well known that The New York Times felt the need to print its sheet music so readers could give it a go.
Mauritania, National Anthem
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
If a national anthem is meant to advertise a country, then Mauritania’s does it very badly. It has such an air of menace, it practically screams, “If you come here, you’re not getting out”. It’s far more threatening than Iran’s or North Korea’s anthems – countries you might think would want to scare – but is brilliant for it.
Democratic Republic of Congo, Arise Congolese
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
The first real national anthem – the UK’s God Save the King – was originally meant to be sung by a soloist, not by a crowd. There’s only one anthem that keeps up that tradition: the Democratic Republic of Congo’s. Its final section is written to be sung by a lone singer, a choir only chiming in with the words “Congo”, “30 June” and “sacred day” in reference to when the country got independence. Unfortunately, it’s rarely done properly, but you get the feeling of its beauty even in the instrumental.
Paraguay, Republic or Death!
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
Paraguay’s anthem isn’t the best by a long shot, but it has by far the best name – a title that sums up everything that’s meant to be at the heart of these songs and of nationalism itself. And it would be very amusing to hear a stadium announcer at the Olympics ask the crowd to, “Stand for Republic or Death.” Although given Paraguay has only ever won one medal – a silver in men’s football – the chances of that happening in Brazil are slim. Come on Paraguayans, make this your year! It's known as one of the best break-up songs ever written and has also been considered to be one of the greatest songs of all time.
For the artist who had a hit with it, Nothing Compares 2 U is so universal in its emotional resonance because it is about loss – a loss that can mean something different to everyone.
In an interview with BBC Radio 6 Music, Sinead O’Connor – who released a version of the song in 1990 – revealed that its emotional content enabled her to perform it again and again over the years.
“It’s really about emotions, it’s not about notes… I never sing a song that I can’t emotionally identify with,” she explained.
Nothing Compares 2 U has always existed in the annals of pop trivia in the ‘hit you didn’t know was written by’ corner – in this case by Prince, who originally penned it for his side project, The Family in 1985.
But Sinead O’Connor’s version, along with its famous video, catapulted the song and its singer into the charts and worldwide fame.
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
In the video, the shaven-headed singer stares directly into the camera, as if addressing a loved one in an emotional plea: "It’s been 7 hours and 15 days since you took your love away". And famously as she sings, a tear begins to roll down her cheek.
O’Connor explained that the reason she was able to channel such raw emotion into her performance is in part due to the style of singing that she studied. “It’s called Bel Canto”, she told the BBC, “but it’s a bit like the Stanislavsky acting method – you have to find emotional stuff inside yourself that you can use.
“It’s always the same thing and it always works... I always think of my mother… which is why I had the little tear in the video. My mother died when I was 17 and it wasn’t long after that that I was making the video.”
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
The song’s popularity is also testament to the genius of Prince as a songwriter and lyricist. As well as an audaciously talented performer, producer and multi-instrumentalist, Prince was a prolific songwriter, and generous with it – other hits he wrote that were recorded by other artists include Manic Monday by The Bangles and I Feel for You by Chaka Khan.
Prince performed Nothing Compares 2 U live with Rosie Gaines, and other artists who have covered it include Soundgarden and Audioslave frontman Chris Cornell.
In response to the shocking news of Prince’s death on 21 April, Cornell posted his version of the song on social media, writing: “I pay tribute to this unequalled artist who has given all our lives so much inspiration.”
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
Prince fans have been posting tributes to the artist on social media using the title of his famous song. On the day of his death, crowds gathered outside the Apollo Theater in New York for an impromptu party. The theatre’s signage proclaims “Nothing Compares 2 U” in memory of “the beautiful one”.
Pince 
On the day of Prince's death, crowds gathered outside the Apollo Theater in New York for an impromptu party (Credit: Matthew Eisman/Getty Images)
The song has taken on a new meaning to his fans in the wake of Prince’s death. Perhaps Sinead O’Connor explained it best: “I think I’m probably similar to millions of people who loved the song, and we’re all people who associated the song with a loss of some kind.” When the Spice Girls released Wannabe in the UK on 8 July 1996, nobody could have foreseen what followed: two years of what can only be described as world domination. ‘Spice mania’ reached across the globe, and while the group couldn’t sustain that level of success for long, they remain the most successful girl group of all time, achieving more in two years than many of their successors have achieved in a decade.
Their debut, Spice, is still the biggest-selling album of all time by a girl group, with more than 31 million copies sold worldwide. And Spotify announced this week that Wannabe has been streamed for the equivalent of 1,000 years on the service.
This video is no longer available 
This video is no longer available
I was 4 years old when Wannabe reached number one, and my love of pop music largely stems from the three minutes that introduced us to Scary, Sporty, Baby, Ginger and Posh. Twenty years on, Wannabe and the Spice Girls still stand out from the crowd, despite the long line of copycat girl groups that followed.
“There was nothing else quite like Wannabe on the radio back in summer 1996. Rock and dance music had been dominating the airwaves and charts for quite some time by that point,” Robert Copsey, editor at the UK’s Official Charts Company tells BBC Culture. “The Spice Girls struck at just the right moment with Wannabe; a gutsy, enthusiastic and unashamed pop song we’d all been craving without even realising it.”
There’s a simple reason for Wannabe’s place in popular culture: it’s catchy as hell. According to a 2014 study by the University of Amsterdam and Manchester’s Museum of Science and Industry, Wannabe is actually the catchiest song of all time.
It’s instantly recognisable, with participants in the university’s project identifying it in just 2.29 seconds, partly due to Mel B’s unforgettable laugh. That’s quicker than hits by Michael Jackson, Whitney Houston and Elvis Presley, as well as Lady Gaga’s debut, Just Dance. So, what is it about the song that makes it so catchy?
Wannabe has been streamed for the equivalent of 1,000 years on Spotify (Credit: Getty)
Wannabe has been streamed for the equivalent of 1,000 years on Spotify (Credit: Getty)
Dr John Ashley Burgoyne and Dr Jan van Balen, who have conducted extensive research into the formula that makes a song memorable, believe Wannabe’s simplicity is integral to its success. “I would describe the song as truly relentlessly catchy,” says Burgoyne. “It’s not that it has this one hook per se. It’s quite ingeniously composed.”
“We found, much to our surprise, that writing a very surprising and unusual hook is not the recipe for long term memorability,” he continues. “Actually, the more conventional your melody in terms of the interval patterns that you use; in terms of the rhythms that you use, the easier the song is to remember over the long term. What makes Wannabe work so well is that it isn’t a difficult song to sing, it has a conventional melody that repeats itself a lot, and it’s just relentless.”
And in the week of its 20th anniversary, Wannabe has made the news again after the United Nations-backed Project Everyone campaign used the song as the soundtrack to its latest campaign video, calling for an end to violence against women, equal pay for equal work and the abolition of child marriage. The song’s famous line has now become a hashtag for girls and women around the world to share what they “really, really want” from world leaders.
Wannabe’s message of female empowerment, famously described by the five-piece as ‘Girl Power’, is as relevant today as it was in 1996. It may have taken the group just minutes to coin the phrase “slam your body down and zig-a-zig-ah” but it seems the world won’t be forgetting it any time soon. This story was originally published on 8 January 2016 but amended on 11 January after the death of David Bowie.
Personas, he’s had a few. David Bowie was the Man Who Sold the World, and the Man Who Fell to Earth. He was the Thin White Duke, Ziggy Stardust and Aladdin Sane. And during his Scary Monsters incarnation, he was a white-faced Pierrot. These were attention-grabbing guises, but there was always a musical depth and range of influences behind them.
On Bowie’s new album Blackstar, he worked with a jazz quartet led by saxophonist Donny McCaslin that has been burning up clubs for the last few years in the singer’s adopted hometown of New York. McCaslin’s band gives the album a dark, open-ended atmosphere that loosens Bowie’s ties to rock until sometimes they vanish completely. It was an audacious move for the artist as he turned 69, but hardly uncharacteristic. He had a long history of championing and borrowing from relatively unknown artists and building bridges between distant genres.
(Credit: Rex)
Bowie appropriated the name of a Texas psychobilly pioneer, Legendary Stardust Cowboy, for his own creation, Ziggy Stardust (Credit: Rex)
There was always a musical depth behind Bowie’s attention-grabbing guises
Who were these unexpected or underrated influences, and how did Bowie acknowledge them in his music? The list has to begin with the Legendary Stardust Cowboy, a Texas psychobilly pioneer whose ’60s single Paralyzed has come up in many Bowie interviews. The singer accurately described the track as “the most awful cacophony,” but he admired the utter commitment behind the performance. He later adopted part of this rock oddity’s name for his own creation, Ziggy Stardust.
Absolute beginners?
Throughout the ’70s, Bowie used his fame to spotlight his obsessions. His love of the then-obscure Velvet Underground was underlined by his cover of I’m Waiting for the Man and his production of Lou Reed’s solo breakthrough, Transformer. He then hooked up with the leader of another beloved but star-crossed band, the Stooges’ Iggy Pop, to produce two landmark albums, The Idiot and Lust for Life, and even played keyboards for the punk progenitor on tour.
(Credit: Getty Images)
Bowie produced two landmark albums for the Stooges’ singer Iggy Pop – The Idiot and Lust for Life (Credit: Getty Images)
Bowie also was enamoured with another young songwriter from that era, a New Jersey kid named Bruce Springsteen. Springsteen’s debut album, Greetings from Asbury Park, was a commercial flop, but Bowie loved its imaginative street tales. He covered two of its songs, Growin’ Up and It’s Hard to be a Saint in the City, and even invited Springsteen to the recording session for the latter, although the tracks didn’t surface until years later.
Bowie used fame to spotlight his obsessions
Bowie’s ‘plastic soul’ phase saw him embracing a young singer and songwriter, Luther Vandross, with whom he co-wrote Young Americans. Vandross became a key part of Bowie’s vocal arrangements, and benefited from the star’s career advice. Vandross once told me that on tour, “Bowie told me to go out there and sing five original songs every night with the band before he went on, and for 45 minutes each night I'd hear, ‘Bowie!’”.
(Credit: Rex)
Bowie championed the singer Luther Vandross before he was known – and co-wrote Young Americans with him (Credit: Rex)
“I said to him, ‘Listen, man, if you want to kill me, just use cyanide, but don't send me out there again.’ And Bowie just said, ‘Hey, I'm giving you a chance to get in touch with who you are. Their reaction isn't the point. What you do is the point.’”
A few years later, Vandross would become a star in his own right.
The Bowie connection
In the late ’70s, Bowie dashed off his famed trilogy of Berlin albums, Low, Heroes and Lodger, that once again found him dancing on the cutting edge of several seemingly unrelated styles in tandem with his new friend, Brian Eno, formerly of Roxy Music. With producer Tony Visconti, they incorporated the pulse of Euro-disco landmarks like the Donna Summer/Giorgio Moroder hit I Feel Love, the warm electronic German art-rock of Kraftwerk and Harmonia, and the aggression of punk.
(Credit: Getty Images)
In the late ‘70s, Bowie incorporated Euro-disco and German art-rock into his music and performances (Credit: Getty Images)
In 1979, Bowie invited avant-garde singers and performance artists Klaus Nomi and Joey Arias to join him for a performance on Saturday Night Live, where the props included a fake pink poodle with a TV screen in its mouth. Thanks in part to the Bowie connection, Nomi went on to establish a brief career as a recording artist before his death in 1983.
It’s a lot more fun progressing than looking back – David Bowie
In subsequent decades, Bowie made records with luminaries such as Chic’s Nile Rodgers, Mick Jagger, Queen and even Bing Crosby. But amid the mainstream commercial efforts, he continued to explore. He was working with Moby before the electronic artist became a mainstream success, and he brought Turkish multi-instrumentalist Erdal Kizilcay, jazz trumpeter Lester Bowie, drum ‘n’ bass innovator Goldie and guitarists Adrian Belew and Reeves Gabrels into his world. In his relatively short life – he died at the age of 35 – Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed over 600 works. A child prodigy, Mozart began composing at a very young age, and his symphonies, concertos, choral and operatic works are considered some of the greatest in history.
But although his genius is unquestionable, for the unfamiliar, Mozart’s formidable reputation and the scale of his output can be off-putting.
What would happen if you tried to listen to everything he ever wrote? That’s exactly what music journalist Alex Marshall – a Mozart novice – challenged himself to do, to discover what all the fuss was about. He took delivery of 200 CDs of Mozart’s music and set about his mammoth task.
What does constant listening of anything – let alone 200 CDs – do to a person? And would his immersion in Mozart make Alex smarter, more relaxed – or drive him mad? BBC Culture followed him on his quest to discover the truth about Mozart. The Christmas carol service was invented in Truro in 1880 by a chap called Edward WhiteBenson. The story goes that on Christmas Eve everybody in Truro would get disgustingly drunk, and that the Bishop of Truro (Benson) was so disgusted that he decided to lure everybody out of the pub and into the church with his new service.
The problem with this story is that there’s no evidence that that’s what motivated Benson. And we do know a lot about him. He later became Archbishop of Canterbury and his whole family had something of a mania for writing. His wife had 39 lesbian lovers. How do we know that? Because she kept a diary, and numbered them. One of his sons was the eminent gay novelist EF Benson. Another was the eminent gay poet Arthur Benson. 
Edward White Benson 
Edward White Benson was Archbishop of Canterbury from 1883 until his death in 1896 (Credit: Getty)
Arthur wrote the words to Land of Hope and Glory. He also wrote a diary of four million words, which is often reckoned to be the longest ever. His daughter Margaret was an eminent lesbian Egyptologist. His daughter Nellie actually stole one of her own mother’s girlfriends and died of TB.
Astoundingly, there were no grandchildren. 
Anyway, in 1880 this family, or rather this hive of oversexed logomania, was in the brand‐new diocese of Truro. It was so brand new that they didn’t even have a cathedral, just a large shed, and Edward White Benson decided to invent the carol service, perhaps not to get the people out of the pubs, but to get the carols out. You see, before this, Christmas carols hadn’t been sung in the church, they’d been sung in the pub. Carols were folk songs; originally they were folk dances (that’s what ‘carol’ meant: ‘a dance in a ring’).
Why would you see three ships come sailing by? The answer is that nobody knows
This is why so many of them are really rather odd. Why would you see three ships come sailing by? The answer is that nobody knows. It was just a song that in some versions involved Jesus on Christmas day in the morning, and in other versions involved three pretty girls on New Year’s Day. It doesn’t make any sense anyway as a Christmas hymn because Bethlehem is landlocked. The same thing goes for The Holly and the Ivy. There is a religious version, but there are also versions that are just about holly and ivy, and the fascinating question of which one is better.
Hark! Who goes there?
Then in the 18th and 19th Centuries folklorists started to collect these folk songs and smarten them up, and people started to write new ones. But even these new ones were a bit incoherent and the versions changed all the time. For example, the co‐founder of Methodism Charles Wesley wrote a beautiful carol that began:
Hark how all the welkin rings
Glory to the King of Kings
Peace on earth and mercy mild
God and sinners reconciled.
Truro Cathedral 
Truro was a new diocese of the Church of England in 1880 when its bishop Edward White Benson invented the carol service, which was held in the city’s cathedral (Credit: Alamy)
And that’s how the carol went for 20 years, until another preacher called George Whitefield published a new version that went:
Hark, the herald angels sing Glory to the new-born King!
Wesley was not in the slightest bit amused by this (probably because the Bible is quite clear that the herald angels who appear to the shepherds saytheir news, they don’t sing it). He wrote that he didn’t want to be held “accountable either for the nonsense or for the doggerel of other men”. But he is. Look in any hymnbook and Hark the Herald Angels Sing will be clearly listed: words by Wesley, tune by Mendelssohn.
We have been carolling away against the explicit wishes of both the lyricist and the composer
Mendelssohn would be even more perplexed and vexed by the whole thing. He died without ever even hearing of the hymn. All he did was to write a song about Gutenberg. It was precisely 400 years since the invention of the printing press and Mendelssohn knocked out a song about it. However, he realised that once the anniversary had passed, it would probably need some new words as songs about type aren’t that popular. He wrote in a letter that he didn’t mind what new words were written just so long as they weren’t religious. Then he died, and a few years later somebody noticed that the tune would work very well with Hark the Herald Angels Sing and that was that. And ever since then people have been carolling away unaware that they are going against the explicit, written wishes of both the lyricist and the composer. 
Bohemian rhapsody
Good King Wenceslas is an even odder business. Good King Wenceslas was a real chap, except he wasn’t a king and he wasn’t called Wenceslas, but he may have been good. His name was Vaclav and he was Duke of Bohemia in the 10th Century. Poor little Vaclav had a difficult childhood. His father died when he was a child and he was brought up partly by his mother and partly by his paternal grandmother. These two ladies did not get along at all well, especially as his mother was pagan and his grandma was Christian. Eventually, his mother solved the problem by the time‐honoured method of dealing with difficult mothers-in-law: she had her assassinated – strangled with a veil, to be precise. Then Vaclav came of age and employed the time‐honoured method of dealing with overbearing mothers: he exiled her.
After that Vaclav started his career of do‐goodery. He would potter about his dukedom, especially at night, giving stuff to the poor. An early biography says:“Rising every night from his noble bed, with bare feet and only one chamberlain, he went around to God’s churches and gave alms generously to widows, orphans, those in prison and afflicted by every difficulty, so much so that he was considered, not a prince, but the father of all the wretched.” 
Vaclav 
The words of the carol Good King Wenceslas are based on the life of a Vaclav, a 10th Century Duke of Bohemia (Credit: Alamy)
Given that he was the duke, I would have thought that he could just free the prisoners. And I don’t think much of prisons that anybody can break into in the middle of the night. Mind you, I also don’t see what he had against shoes; and I shall never know now that he’s dead. 
If I had a brother named Boleslaus the Cruel, I would watch out
You see, Vaclav still had one family member left, his brother Boleslaus the Cruel. Now, if I had a brother with a name like that, I would watch out. It’s a dead giveaway. I would employ bodyguards. I would watch my back like a hawk. But Vaclav didn’t and Boleslaus and a few of his friends assassinated him in 935. It is a sad truth, but a certain one, that Good King Wenceslas did not look out. 
But where (I hear you cry) was Wenceslas’ faithful page in all this, the one who followed him around in the snow? Well, his name was Podevin and he doesn’t seem to have been there at the assassination; instead he showed his Christian charity by taking out one of the assassins in a revenge killing before being chased, cornered in a forest, and killed.
Choristers in Kings College, Cambridge 
The most famous carol service is the Festival of Nine Lessons and Carols held each year in the chapel of King’s College, Cambridge (Credit: Alamy)
Boleslaus was still wiping the blood off his lance when he was told that his wife had given birth to a son. So he called him Strachkvas, which means ‘Dreadful Feast’. Then he got on with being cruel and the Bohemians started to get all nostalgic for the days of Vaclav. Soon Vaclav was declared a saint, and then he was posthumously declared king by Otto the Great. 
There’s something so Christmassy about Jingle Bells even though it never mentions Christmas
Then, 500 years later, someone in Finland wrote a song about the coming of spring. It was a nice, bouncy tune with nice bouncy words, but it was Finnish and nobody noticed what a good melody it was until 300 years after that, when an Englishman called John Mason Neale found the obscure Finnish tune and the obscure (in England) Bohemian saint and put the two together. Why the hell he did this, nobody really knows, but he did and it was published in 1853. Neale was an odd chap. He once wrote a history of church pews.
There’s just something so timelessly English about Away in a Manger, O Little Town of Bethlehem and We Three Kings, even though they’re all from the US. There’s something so Christmassy about Wenceslas and Ding Dong Merrily on High and Jingle Bells even though none of them mentions Christmas, and Jingle Bells (which is also American) was written about Thanksgiving.
 But somehow these carols work, and so do all the others. It may be something to do with Edward White Benson’s skill in laying out the carol service, or it may be the eggnog.
Extracted from A Christmas Cornucopia by Mark Forsyth © 2016, published by Viking.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called “If You Only Read 6 Things This Week”. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Earth, Culture, Capital, Travel and Autos, delivered to your inbox every Friday.




